where I want to begin by thanking
everybody by thanking you in the media
and also thanking everyone for the the
huge efforts that the country is is
making to comply with the advice that
we've been given and we're asking such a
huge amount asking students to put their
education on hold we're asking people
not to socialize in the normal way and
already we can see the impact this is
having on the UK economy and on on
business on great great companies and so
it's vital that we in government stand
behind them when what we are asking
everyone to do is so crucial for saving
literally thousands of of lives by
defeating this virus and unconsciousness
as the days have gone by that people we
want to know how long we are expecting
them to keep it up and I wanted to try
to say something today about how I see
the timescale of this campaign and and
where we're going and what we we need to
do and I do think looking at it all that
we can turn the tide within the next 12
weeks and I'm absolutely confident that
we can send a coronavirus packing in
this country but only if we take the
steps we all take the steps that we have
outlined and that is vital because that
is how we're going to reduce the peak
and once we've achieved that and I think
that we will if you do those take take
the steps that I've said then the
scientific progress that we're making
already start to come into play and I
wanted to discuss a little bit of that
this afternoon with you because we are
rapidly becoming so much better at
understanding the the genomics of the
heart of this virus along that is going
on in this country we're getting better
at understanding the medicines that may
treat and cure
and today we've put the first British
corona patient into a randomized trial
for drugs that may treat the disease UK
experts scientists expect to start
trials for the first vaccine within a
month and we're getting better at
testing this crisis is so difficult
because the enemy is invisible and the
answer is to remove the cloak of
invisibility and to identify the virus
and to be able to know who which of us
is carrying it or who has actually had
it and now got over it and to give you
an idea of what is coming down the track
we're in negotiations today to buy a so
called antibody test as simple as a
pregnancy test that can tell whether you
have had the disease and it's early days
but if it works as its proponents claim
then we will buy literally hundreds of
thousands of these kits as soon as
practicable because obviously it has the
potential to be a total GameChanger
because once you know that you have had
it you know that you're likely to be
less vulnerable you're less likely to
pass it on and you can go back to work
and of course by the same token were
massively increasing the testing to see
whether you have it now and ramping up
daily testing from 5,000 a day to 10,000
to 25,000 and then up at a 250,000 and
that knowledge of where the virus is
will make a huge difference to our
management of the disease and our
ability to reduce disruption and
economic difficulties and I went it took
to set that out because it's wrong it's
this is rapidly coming down the track as
I say but it will take time to come on
stream and that is why in the meantime
to get back to a theme which you know
I'm going to repeat it is absolutely
vital
we follow the advice that we've been
hearing over last a few days the the
announcements that we've already made
about staying at home if you have the
symptoms if your family has the symptoms
about avoiding unnecessary contact
avoiding gatherings where you may pick
up the disease pubs bars restaurants
please please follow all that advice
scrupulously work from home if you
possibly can wash your hands wash your
hands and it's by this combination of
ruthless determined collective action
and scientific progress there we're
already seeing that we will we will
succeed and I know you how difficult it
may be or it may seem right now but if
we do this together we will save as I
say many many thousands of lives and to
everybody in the UK business where
everybody who is worried about their
their jobs and everybody in who faces
difficulties because of the advice that
we are giving I say to business stand by
your employees stand by your workers
because we will stand by you and you'll
be hearing more about that in the course
of the next day or so and that is how by
a mixture of collective determined
collective action and scientific
progress I've seen it out that we will
turn the tide of this disease and beat
it together now I'm going to ask I don't
know whether whether either of our two
distinguished experts need to add
anything to that I don't think they they
do one of me one of me running why don't
we just go straight to two questions I
don't propose to spend a very long time
at this particular one since we've had
we've had about four or five of these
already in the last few days you know I
don't I don't want to worry you with
these occasions you feel very useful
let's let's let's play - lets go round
up the tour Nora
first Laura Kunz
BBC and thank you very much Prime
Minister and you told the country
yesterday you wouldn't hesitate to take
extra measures people are worried about
what that might mean you can you tell
people what might be next will you
within days seek to shut pubs cafes
clubs and a lot of people have contacted
us today to say the measures set out for
businesses to apply to loans is simply
not quick enough for them to be able to
keep their staff on we've had a lot of
messages from people who are running
businesses or a deeply worried is it
good enough to say to business you can
apply for a loan when many of them face
immediate decisions that might mean they
have to cut staff yeah first of all
decisions about pubs bars restaurants
and so on as I said we're guided very
much by by the science and and whether
we think that the advice that we've
given is is working so as long as we
think that people are actually staying
away from places where they may transmit
or or pick up the disease in the way
that we've recommended that we've
recommended they should avoid those
places if we feel that that is working
then we just want to say thank you to
everybody for their extraordinary
efforts and encourage everybody to do
likewise if we feel that that it isn't
working as I said yesterday we need to
bring forward tougher measures then of
course nothing is his rule diet but I
want to thank everybody for what they're
doing I know it's tough I know it's
difficult but we've just got to do it
together and please please please follow
the advice the second thing you
mentioned businesses of a lot of course
get grants upfront by all too aware of
the difficulties and worries that they
face double more on this tomorrow from
from Rishi the the Chancellor issue soon
act the Chancellor and my message to to
business is the one I gave just now
stand by your employees as the because
we're going to stand by you and we're
going to stand by the workers of this
country
this time it's going to be different as
we come through this difficult economic
phase you remember what happened in 2008
and what he said we bailed out the banks
and we didn't look after the people who
really suffer this time we're gonna make
sure that we look after the people who
really suffer from the economic
consequences of what we're asking them
to do we'll be directing our support to
them first looking after the people
first just a couple of questions I'm
over the half of the 29 deaths today are
in London so p.m. I have to ask you on
behalf of Londoners do you not think it
is now right to move to a more
substantial lockdown of the capital like
they have done in Italy and Spain and
France where you can't leave your house
unless your key worker or you're going
to the shops for food or medicine are
you not doing that yet because you don't
know how to enforce it or you can't
enforce it or rather you'll do it but
the time isn't quite right and just
secondly a bit of hope there you're
suggesting to the public that if they
follow the rules that you can turn the
tide on this disease are you telling
people that by the summer they might
they just might be able to go back to
normal life be able to go on their
summer holidays thank you
yeah thanks Beth we'll look a crucial
thing there I will stress that we do
want to see people following the advice
that we've given in the capital which is
after as you rightly say the place where
the disease seems to have been making
the fastest progress and it's vital that
people follow that advice and and
there's huge evidence that they are in
in the takings in the in the retail
sector the hospitality sector TfL in
Inner London down about 80 percent in in
Alta lund and down about 60% but some
evidence that in some parts of the of
the capital it's it's very patchy and
some some areas where people aren't
perhaps following it in quite the way
that we need them to do so you know that
is why to get back to the answer that I
gave to tomorrow we may have to consider
going further but I don't wanna stress
that you know there is no process
effect of us wanting to stop public
transport in London or stop TF stop the
tube or the all the buses we're not
going to be telling people that under no
circumstances if they really need to go
to work can they go to work I hope
people understand there's been some you
know I'm sure through no fault of the
the media but there's been a bit of
misunderstanding floating around about
that we're going to want people to avoid
gatherings where they can transmit the
disease well absolutely
emphatic about that and if it becomes
necessary to do more to ensure that then
we certainly we certainly will do so on
a second question which was really about
the timing I I am very confident that
we'll get this thing done I'm very
confident that we'll beat coronavirus I
think we can turn the tide within the
next 12 weeks but it depends on
collective resolute action and I think
the encouraging thing is that the more
disciplined we can all be in in doing
that the the greater the chances that
the scientific community will be able
soon to come out as I say with fantastic
results on testing to say nothing of the
other other medical treatments your own
personal TV and if I could ask a couple
of questions to Chris
witty there's quite a lot of concern
within the NHS about capacity running
short in London hospitals could you tell
us a bit about how you see the capacity
issue in London secondly is you'll also
be aware there is a lot of concern among
medical staff that they're not getting
the predict protective equipment which
is apparently in the system it's just
not in the right places how quickly will
you be able to get into the right places
and then finally Prime Minister you came
up with a very interesting number just
now you said 250,000 tests what what did
you mean by that are they are they on
course
- I'm gonna pass that ball strip
straight down the line - Patrick who
gave me the figure earlier on but that's
well that's well that's where we want to
get you I mean we we want to testing is
I think crucial to our success in
defeating this this virus we're making
fantastic progress on testing i we had a
great meeting in number 10 a couple of
nights ago with people who are supplying
tests of all kinds not just the antibody
test that I I mentioned but much faster
and more efficient tests to see whether
you currently have the the disease and
the potential of those to help us is
obviously enormous we're not there yet
but we will get there very soon Patrick
you want to say about testing oh yeah
this is obviously wants to answer as
well but the testing to public health
England the currently leading the
testing on this they're ramping up to
25,000 there are proposals to get that
much higher through other mechanisms for
the virus itself and then the antibody
test if that turns out to be something
that can really be applied that's one
that you'd want to ramp up as well so
ideally you'd like to get to those sorts
of numbers you'd like to be able to do
it for both testing the infection itself
and testing the antibody practically
that can be done I mean the testing for
the virus is a pretty standard
technology it just happens to be
obviously precise for this virus but
it's not a new technology you've got to
invent and if the antibody test is
reliable and works and you know that if
sinned that's that centers but if it
does then that's a relatively easy thing
to scale up on pressure in London so at
the moment London from the corona virus
is under pressure but indirectly but
that's going to go up and that is
actually the reason for doing all of the
things we're trying to do and the first
thing that we'll get under the greatest
pressure will be in the intensive care
and respiratory care system and that's
the thing which in a sense that's the
first point of of real pressure on the
NHS is going to happen and to be clear
even if everybody does
all the things we hope and really really
would ask that they do do the numbers
will continue to go up over the next two
weeks because it continues it takes a
while for there to be a lag if there's a
lag until things start to improve now at
that stage we need to do three things
the first of which is obviously to try
and pull the peak down and that is the
key thing that everybody can help with
in terms of the social distancing and
let me be very straightforward if the
numbers are high enough if a high enough
proportion of people choose to and do go
in for serious social distancing and
there's a lot of evidence a huge
proportion of people are we don't know
yet whether it's enough that will pull
the peak down if they do not then the
battery's going to be a problem this is
this is the national effort that the
second thing we have to do and this is
an NHS issue is to increase the number
of beds which are capable of taking
respiratory patients because that's the
big bottleneck for this particular
infection so that's that's very
important and then the third thing we
have to do is at the moment all NHS
staff who are getting Vera getting
symptoms that are compatible with this
virus are quite rightly selfish lately
and isolating with their families if
they have a household and that is taking
people out of the system and the key
thing we need to do is get the testing
out the first priority was itu second
priority all the people who got symptoms
but the next priority for us is to get
the NHS workers so we can test them
quickly and then if they got it fine
they continue but they know they've had
it once if they've not got it then they
can come back to work or if the the
reason they've stayed at home is because
someone else in their family has got the
symptoms we would test them and see if
they've got it on PPE the though there
is a kind of there's a local and a
global issue on this I completely
understand the points that my colleagues
in the NHS are concerned about on PPE
they write to me regularly about this
and entirely reasonably and this is a
major work strand of work for
apartment of Health and Social Care is
to make the sure that this works
obviously in the short-term this is
about making sure that the PPE stocks
that there are go to the right places in
the longer term it's about making sure
that the global system because of course
everybody wants this and the supplies in
some areas have gone down there is a
glut there will be a globalist we need
to put together and the final thing we
need to get right on PPE is training
because if you use PPE
incorrectly it doesn't really have any
advantages and occasionally can even
make things worse so it is important to
get all three of those sorted out thanks
Chris
Mesa Mesa Hall Daily Express
thank you very much prime minister
firstly on the antibody test that you
mentioned can you say a bit more about
how that's going to be rolled out will
people be tested in their own homes how
will people be selected whether they're
going to have it and secondly there is
some evidence that some shops and online
retailers have been whacking up the
prices of in-demand goods
I mean concern that there is
profiteering going on in this national
crisis well I'm going to ask Chris and
Patrick to talk about the the test kit
though are as I understand it it's like
a pregnancy test kitty so I think I
think blood is is required right rather
than urine but that's the that's the
basic idea but I'll invite the experts
and the scientific to comment on their
on the test and it may sir on you know
mass buying and the jet and that and the
the price issue I really hope that
retailers will continue to be reasonable
and I certainly don't wouldn't want to
see profiteering of any kind as as I
said before in these meetings you know
we've got good supply chains
farm-to-fork there's no reason for the
shops really to be to be empty and just
I of course I everybody understands why
people are buying stuff we're all being
advised us to stay at home if we think
we have symptoms and so on but please be
reasonable please be reasonable in your
shopping be considerate and thoughtful
of others as you do it we should be
clear that although we're confident
there will be antibody tests
we're not absolutely confident yet about
whether the ones that are currently on
the market are the right ones and that
needs to be tested out and that's
something which is an absolute priority
for public health England but once we
have these the key thing for in the
first case health care workers and then
other workers and members of society is
will be able to say to someone you've
had this virus you're not likely to get
again at least in the immediate term and
now we can be confident you can return
to work and now we can be confident you
don't need to take some of the
precautions that you've been taken to
date now it'll take they'll be a while
before we've actually got this in large
enough numbers and this is more useful
for a variety of reasons I'd probably
this is not the right environment to go
into but more useful the further on in
the epidemic it is but this will be
something which helps society to
normalize little by little even whilst
we still have significant number of
cases so this is going to make as the
Prime Minister says a very big
difference in the long run once we got
tests that we can rely on thanks very
much Lucy Fisher times thank you two
quick questions if I may firstly to the
experts new data from the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention shows
that nearly 40% of patients sick enough
to be hospitalized in the u.s. were aged
20 to 54 is there any concern that the
pandemic is affecting younger people in
the UK worse than previously thought and
secondly and the Prime Minister a tide
of redundancies are sweeping the country
and your own MPs have said that
government is not doing enough to help
struggling businesses retain workers
you've mentioned that the Chancellor is
going to talk more about this tomorrow
but do you accept that every day you
delay announcing new support measures
will cause thousands of jobs to go well
just let me say first of all on that
it's very very important everybody
understands that we will stick by
businesses and I hope that businesses
will stick by their employees this
country is going to to bounce back we're
gonna need some fantastic companies
remaining to bounce back as well and
there it's absolutely vital that
everybody understands that now Ritchie
will be saying
the chance we'll be saying more tomorrow
about the package were putting in place
for four workers across the country to
to support everybody through this
difficult time we've been talking to the
trade unions and others today and we
think we'll have a great package ready
to go so I hope people will stick by
their employees because we're all going
to need them on the second question you
asked it's clear that there are three
things that probably people need to
think about simultaneously firstly the
great majority people who get this far
as irrespective of age will recover from
it and most of those will have a mild or
moderate illness not requiring any
hospitalization very important to make
that point first off because I think
that isn't in a key point for people to
remember it is particularly it seems to
be true for children where children
seemed on the whole to have this as a
milder disease than adults and probably
quite a lot milder in those cases how
the second thing is it is also true that
particular groups of older people or
vulnerable people medically vulnerable
do get this more severely and if you
look in the data from China if you look
in the data from Italy and if you look
in the data initially from the UK most
of the deaths are occurring in those
groups but and this is the point that
the u.s. is making and I think it's an
important point to emphasize that is not
to say that there will not be severe
cases amongst people who are younger
adults and that is important because
it's important that people don't
trivialize this this is a significant
issue for everybody although the great
burden of disease will tend to fall in
terms of severe disease in the more
vulnerable groups and that's why we've
given very specific advice to people who
are over 70 or have pre-existing health
conditions that there will be people who
don't fall into those groups who will
fall seriously ill unfortunately the
great majority will not but some will
and so we do ask people take this
seriously for yourself as well as taking
it seriously for all of society and as a
way of taking pressure off the NHS
thanks very much
Gordon Gordon Telegraph
last question I'm afraid everybody Thank
You Prime Minister just two just to pick
up on what Beth Australia you've you've
quoted this figure of 12 weeks to turn
the tide which is the first time you've
said that you haven't really defined for
us what turning the tide means but I
don't know whether perhaps Chris or Sir
Patrick might be able to explain what
that would look like does that mean that
we will be well over this and we'll be
returning to our normal lives or does
that mean that we will have just hit the
peak and will be starting to go back to
the other side what does that actually
mean
what I want us to do is to get on top of
it
and at the moment the disease is is is
proceeding you know in a way that does
not seem yet to be responding to our
interventions and I believe that a
combination of the measures that we're
asking the public to take and better
testing scientific progress will enable
us to get on top of it within the next
12 weeks and turn the tide now I cannot
stand here and tell you that we will
have by the end of June that we will be
on the downward slope it's possible but
Ike I simply can't say that that's
that's for certain of course not we
don't know where we are we don't know
how long this thing will go on for but
what I can say is that this is going to
be finite we will turn the tide and I
can see how to do it within the next 12
weeks anyway
comment on Patrick
well I think I think we we're absolutely
at the beginning of this we're where the
measures that are in place should start
having an impact on the rate of growth
of the epidemic and those are
significant measures as we all know and
they're expected to then delay and break
transmission train chains so you would
expect the epidemic to come down and the
sooner we get that down the more then we
can move into phases as well where we
can test
and trace and make sure that we keep on
top of this and there's a start of
clinical trials first patient enrolled
today there's the start of vaccine
trials in mid April expected these are
things which all together start to tell
us that we've moved from a phase of it's
growing and we need to take these
measures to try and stop it growing to
one where we're saying put a lid on it
and begin to start looking at what we do
beyond that in order to get into the
right position and so I think that's
where we need to get to and that's the
time scale over which we need to really
push to make sure that we get there
thanks very much everybody I hope that I
don't want to sound um you know I'm
often accused of being unnecessarily
booster about things and I certainly
don't want to strike that note today but
I genuinely think that we buy the
combination of these two things we will
turn the tide and we will get through it
but it is vital that we all do the first
of those take the first of those two
steps together we do need a much a very
very energetic concerted effort to
follow the medical advice and everybody
knows what it is we will make a huge
huge difference if we all do it together
and then I think what will happen is
that we will start to see development
such as we've seen in other countries
where things of that the curve has
started to come down we will see the
impact of our testing program some of
the new tests that were talking about I
think we'll start to see those making a
making a profound difference and that is
why my message to two companies is is
really think very carefully before you
you start laying off your staff we do
want to stand behind good companies we
do want to make sure that people
recognize that if they stand behind
their staff they should stand behind
their start because we in the government
are going to stand behind British firms
and as I say you've heard a lot about
that this week from
from the chancellor you gonna hear more
tomorrow about what we're gonna do to
support to support employees thank you
all very much this is probably I think
this is the kind of a how many of these
we've we've now had you're all moving
further and further away from each other
in deference to to the virus I think
that I think that there may be a moment
when we start to to do this remotely or
is that I don't know what the what the
plan is but it is it is I hope you agree
that however we do it it is important
that we should continue to have these
discussions every day I do I do think
that they're valuable we try to be as as
as as candid as we possibly can about
what is going on and I hope that you
find them useful so we may have to find
something we may have to find some way
of getting them done in a way that
doesn't look to everybody else as their
work you know when we're somehow not
following the advice that we give the
public do you get me I mean I know
you're all sitting a long way away from
each other but it may be that we you
know we need to do more even more social
social distancing what do you think some
sort of remote some sort of remote press
con can you can you live with that do
you wander you want to be like yo course
all I see mean you're worried you won't
be able to ask questions I can see where
anxiety okay well I will make a pledge
that if we have to move which I think we
probably will if we have to move to a
more remote form of interrogation I will
absolutely ensure that everybody gets to
ask questions they're not necessarily
all the same meeting thank you all very
much thank you so the Prime Minister
they're promising to go on answering
reporters questions and the answer to
his question